WEST POKOT: Two Cabinet secretaries were forced to take to their heels after a swarm of bees attacked a public meeting. Devolution Cabinet Secretary Mwangi Kiunjuri and his Water counterpart Eugene Wamalwa were about to unveil a plaque to commission Marich Pass Irrigation Scheme in West Pokot County when the bees raided the venue. Wamalwa, who was addressing journalists, was forced to cut short his speech after the bees swarmed around his head. The two leaders and other senior government officials were forced to run for safety, with some of them covering their heads with their coats. Police officers who were there to protect the leaders and the public also had no option but to scamper for safety while &quot;clutching their useless guns&quot;. Some of the residents claimed the bees were attracted by strong perfumes worn by some of the dignitaries. &quot;The leaders were smelling sweet. This attracted the bees from a nearby tree,&quot; said Mercline Chepket. Ms Chepket said they usually work on the farm where the meeting was but had never been attacked by the bees as they don&#39;t apply sweet smelling perfumes. The leaders later travelled 7km to Sigor town where they addressed residents. Kerio Valley Development Authority (KVDA) Managing Director David Kimosop said they had spent Sh33 million on the irrigation project and also set aside Sh1 billion for Phase Three of the Wei Wei Irrigation Scheme. &quot;The Italian government has helped us in ensuring that this county has enough food and stops depending on relief food,&quot; he said. Mr Kiunjuri said his ministry was working with KVDA to ensure that all parts of the country are food secure. &quot;This region has vast idle land and the Jubilee Government is committed to ensure that this land is turned into productive land,&quot; he said. Wamalwa said the Government is committed to increasing the land under irrigation to one million acres. &quot;We don&#39;t want to depend on one region to supply other regions with food. We shall set up irrigation schemes in arid regions to ensure that we have enough food for our people,&quot; he said. Other leaders present were&nbsp;West Pokot Deputy Governor Titus Lotee,&nbsp;Pokot Central MP Philip Rotino, West Pokot Woman Representative Regina Nyeris, Lake Basin Development Authority Chairman Raphael Tuju and West Pokot County Commissioner Wilson Wanyanga.